I am a very lucky man. I live where I want to live in the middle of what I think is the most beautiful county in England. This is an opinion that is shared by many farmers in all parts of the country. We value the landscape that surrounds us, the fields, the woods, the hedges and trees, a patchwork view that has evolved over many centuries. It is not a contrived landscape like a garden or park, nor is its beauty due to any foresight on our part. It is the result of trying to farm profitably, to make the best use of every acre. And for me the pleasure in that landscape does depend to a great extent on how well the land is farmed. I see nothing very beautiful in a neglected farm, better if it were not farmed at all, but allowed to revert to nature.
﻿     I watched the opening of the Commonwealth Games on television last week. The children of Manchester danced in the arena, David Beckham helped a little six-year-old girl, with a terminal heart condition and attached permanently to an oxygen cylinder, hand the Jubilee Baton to the Queen. A million pound fireworks display lit up the night sky. The late news followed. The first item showed pictures of the latest drought disaster to hit southern Africa, fourteen million people facing starvation, half of them children. Pictures of  little six-year-olds with swollen stomachs and skeletal frames who will certainly die before help can come.  Shots of empty grain stores following three years of no rain. I know the two sets of images cannot be taken together to put things right, life is not that simple. There are many other factors involved, HIV Aids, war and political instability. But as June Whitfield, one of the celebrities launching the appeal for emergency aid the next morning, is reported to have said ‘it is quite incredible that the public should be asked again to help’. And she is quite right.  This is not an unexpected disaster like an earthquake, forest fire or tidal wave. This is Africa where droughts happen all the time.
﻿When news that the Government was going to invest millions in the future of organic farming hit the headlines last week, my first reaction was ‘good for them’. However, as I read on, I began to be alarmed by some of the extraordinary statements appearing in the press about what I would call ‘conventional farming’. And not only the national press, who love a good story if they can hype it up. Our regional press, including I am sorry to say, the Western Morning News, were making the most outrageous slurs about modern farming. Our editorial that first morning said that organic farming was a reversion to ‘good husbandry after years of exploitative pillaging of land and abuse of livestock which led to mass-poisoning of the land and the populace’. And the paper’s main article the following morning by food correspondent, Mark Daniel, used phrases such as ‘the pursuit of cheapness at any cost has cost the health of billions and the lives of millions’ and ‘local, fresh, organically produced food and drink taste 100 times better than the muck which is produced regardless of provenance and good practice’.
﻿We are half way through our harvest; 16 acres of barley done  with 14 acres of oats to come. As I write, the rain is gently falling and I should be doing our Suckler Cow Premium application for this year. The harvest is nothing like the worry it used to be when we started farming. Then the corn was cut with a binder and left in stooks for two or three weeks. It needed another spell of dry weather to get it into a stack and was still a long way from being thrashed. Now the contractor rolls in with the combine, which seems to get bigger every year, and four hours later 16 acres of barley is in the corn bin. We used to make sure the gateways were wide enough but now the concern is whether the field is wide enough. We still have some two or three acre fields, but I doubt they will ever grow corn again. 
﻿Over the years I have followed with interest, and sometimes with exasperation, the correspondence in these pages on badgers and TB. I have never, until now, felt inclined or perhaps dared is a better word, to join in. Are badgers to blame for the regular recurrence of TB in cattle in the south west, or do cattle occasionally infect the odd badger? The arguments from both sides have become more and more extreme, and I have been reluctant to get caught in the middle. But last week, a letter from one of the most frequent writers, Martin Hancox of Stroud, has stung me into the debate. He states that ‘no one has shown how badgers can give cows a respiratory lung infection in the field’. Well, I reckon I can and quite easily.
﻿Last week saw our harvest completed, with the straw, which we value nearly as much as the corn, safely baled and in the barn, and all before a bright harvest moon reached full. We have had a good year so far. The summer has suited us, with rain at regular intervals to keep our steeper pastures from burning and not too much to interfere with silage and hay making. We have enough of everything to face whatever the winter might throw at us, or am I tempting fate? What a difference this is compared with last year, when we had too many animals stuck on the farm, thanks to ‘foot and mouth’. We went into last winter with about half our fodder requirements and ended up buying silage and straw in the spring. I wonder how many people outside farming realise how long it takes to get back to where we were 18 months ago, when the F&M horror all started. And beef and sheep farming wasn’t going a bundle then.
﻿         Last week saw our rams in with the ewe flock. This is very late for us; we have for many years put the rams in soon after shearing with a view to catching the early suck-lamb trade in late February or March. We are able to keep our small flock of ewes and lambs outdoors through the winter on mowing grass, without supplementary feeding unless it snows. This has given us the best lamb price, does our light land good and takes the pressure off our silage and hay acres in late spring early summer. However two things have persuaded my daughter-in-law, who manages the sheep, to change the system. Firstly we are still recovering from the mismanagement of the flock last year when we were forced to keep our lambs on the ewes until May or June. And more importantly, the very good trade we used to get at Easter seems to have slipped in recent years. The price we received for the last few lambs we sold in late May this year was considerably better than the price we got in March. What caused this I don’t know. Did the export trade to France restart at that time perhaps? 
﻿         “If farmers do not receive extra cash for their milk, supplies will run down, forcing up the retail price”. Words from Ben Gill, NFU President, or the Chairman of one of the larger farmer Dairy Co-operatives? No, a quote from Lord Whitty, Food and Farming Minister, in a cutting from last week’s Times newspaper, which was given me by an outraged neighbour. The short piece said that Ministers fear that milk prices could rise this winter as poor rates for dairy farmers trigger an exodus from the industry. So Lord Whitty has unwittingly, if you will pardon the pun, come clean on Government policy. Do nothing for agriculture unless it affects the price of food. If we peasants can carry on producing milk for peanuts, that’s OK. So long as supplies are sufficient, he can fold his arms and flannel his way out of awkward questions when accosted by desperate farmers.
﻿          The other day I dug a grave for my wife. Well, actually, my wife asked me to dig a grave for her old sheepdog, Sammy, who had come to the end of a long and I hope, happy life. Of all the pets we humans keep, many have a rotten existence, but working sheepdogs seem to have the best of it. They do what comes naturally, appear to thoroughly enjoy their work and are remarkably faithful to one owner. We have always had sheepdogs through the years we have been farming, but I expect Sammy will be the last. Jenny handed over the management of the flock a few years ago to our daughter-in-law, so any successor will have to belong to her. It used to amuse me sometimes to find that a geriatric Sammy had staggered down to the farm late in the evening and was standing looking at the sheep in the lambing shed, when he should have been taking a quick turn round the house before bed. What was he thinking about or was he thinking at all? I assume they were happy memories.
         Recently we received a thick envelope containing a 30-page booklet about the welfare of laying hens. It came from DEFRA HQ in London, so I resisted the temptation to throw it away unread. The accompanying letter explained that all stockmen are required by law ‘to be familiar with, and have access to, appropriate welfare codes’. How did the powers that be know that we keep half a dozen hens, which look after themselves around the farm buildings laying their eggs in the most inaccessible places? The letter says they used information collected as part of the agricultural census, but we haven't done one for years.
If I was a young man again, would I go farming now? Without hesitation the answer would be "Yes". Am I mad? My wife says "Undoubtedly, but then you always did like a challenge." And the way things are, a challenge it certainly would be.  Being a farmer has always seemed to be the most enduring occupation one could choose. The air we breathe is all around us, although it can be pretty horrible in some places. Water basically falls out of the sky, but the third essential for life, food, has to be produced on a day-to-day basis unceasingly. You would expect agriculture, therefore, with an expanding world population, to be the safest profession to join. It may not feel like that in Britain at the moment, but I have absolutely no doubt that circumstances will change. 
﻿Jenny and I landed in Boston on our way to see my brother in British Columbia. Watching our approach from the plane window in the hope of getting an aerial view of the city, there was a moment when I thought we were going to splash down in the Atlantic. The runway seemed to emerge from the waves as the wheels touched and the Captain apologized for having to brake so sharply due to a shortened runway. I suspect he meant that we were landing at high tide. If sea levels rise at all, with global warming, Boston won’t have an airport. Faced with similar problems on that scale, one wonders why the U.S. government doesn’t accept the Kyoto agreement. In fact, the many Americans we talked to on our long sight-seeing train journey across the States seemed just as concerned as we are in the U.K. with their government’s reluctance to join the rest of the world on this issue.
﻿Leaving Boston on the first leg of our sightseeing journey to Seattle, we boarded the train for New York with some little apprehension. This first and shortest step would determine whether we would survive the next 5000 miles. Jenny is a great train enthusiast. She enjoys the freedom of movement and seems able to sleep on a reclining seat while I tend to fidget around trying to get comfortable. Happily the first impressions were favourable. Passengers are shepherded on board from a station waiting room and found a seat by a train attendant, as if joining a plane. The coaches are roomy and the seats comfortable, the dining car and buffet food sufficient, if uninspiring, and the toilets (the only place in the States they are not called rest rooms) clean, at least at the start of each day, and spacious for the ‘Ladies’. Our 250 pound travel pass only allowed us ‘coach class’, so we would have to survive the nights on the longer stretches; upgrading to first class for a sleeping berth for just one of the nights would cost us more than the whole trip put together. Looking out at our first view of the American countryside, which was monotonous enough to allow us to get out the Amtrak timetables and route maps, we decided we could make it.
﻿At Galesburg, Jenny and I boarded the California Zephyr to San Francisco. This was one of Amtrak’s superliners or double-decker transcontinental trains, with passengers on the upper deck and services and baggage on the lower. Galesburg, where we had to wait 6 hours to make our connection, was a pleasant country town, about the size of our home town of Crediton, with a wide main street that needed little imagination to take one back to the 19th century. There were no tourists and it actually rained! 
﻿We are home again at last. Five weeks is the longest holiday we have ever managed in 50 years of farming. The winter corn is tilled and up, the cattle and sheep are all looking well, and the bookwork is up to date. That is one good thing about growing old -  you can take a long holiday without being missed! There is only one cloud on the horizon - the Visa bill from America, which is due any day.
﻿It seems that nothing has changed on the farming political front during our five weeks absence from the UK. I suppose I shouldn’t be surprised, although I did expect that echoes from the Countryside March might still just be audible. We knew it took place; we saw a brief picture on an American TV news of the crowds in London, with the caption “Toffs march in defence of their sport”. Was Government moved at all by the show of feeling which the number of people taking part was supposed to generate? Without access to back numbers of the newspapers, I shall never really know. Certainly, statements from Ministers or Government spokesmen seem as negative as ever about the future of farming. 
﻿I was asked  the other day in our village shop - yes, we still have one, thank goodness - by a friend who had read about our recent rail journey across the States, whether I hadn’t found America ‘vast’. I said this was not a description that immediately sprang to mind. We only really travelled through the northern half of  the country, and did not see the ranch lands of Texas or the deserts of the south west states. 
﻿I can well remember, in the spring of 1951,  standing on the top of a hill about a mile from where I am now writing and being shown a large depression in the ground. I had just started farming and, having enjoyed a welcoming supper, was being given a stroll round his acres by my neighbour. What did I think that was? A bomb crater I guessed. No, that is where all the animals were buried after a ‘Foot and Mouth’ outbreak on the farm in 1935. It had apparently made little long term impact on the farm or the neighbourhood; outbreaks occurred from time to time but the perceived wisdom then was that no farmer went bust after going down with the disease. The compensation allowed one to start again with improved  breeding stock; remember in those days there was no A.I. and quality in farm animals often left much to be desired.
﻿This week we are starting to bring the cattle in for the winter. We normally keep them out as long as possible into December, which shortens the winter tedium of strawing out the covered yards and cleaning the feed passages. Our light land doesn’t poach easily and the cattle are much healthier living outside, but my son, Jim, has decided that, with near record rainfall in November, enough is enough. Following the horrors of last year, we have reduced our suckler herd down to 55 cows and 90 followers, which, on 250 acres of pasture, would  be considered by most farmers as being very under stocked. The cattle also have access to about thirty acres of woodland at the edges of the pasture fields, where they can shelter in the worst weather. A few years ago we had 85 suckler cows plus followers, and even with that number we were farming very extensively. 
﻿Last Friday, I went as usual to collect our weekly box of organic veg from Phil and Helen at Linscombe Farm. If they are not too busy, I quite enjoy arguing the pros and cons of organic farming. I was, therefore, somewhat taken aback to be hailed by Phil, before I had hardly opened the car door, as the ‘man who hates the RSPB’. Apparently that was the impression I had left him with, after reading my comments last week on the Government’s appointment of Graham Wynne, of the RSPB, to the new body overseeing the changes to the food and farming industries.
﻿Christmas shopping - not my favourite occupation. That sounds like Scrooge, but you know what I mean. It’s not buying the presents; it’s the full car parks, the shoulder to shoulder crowds and the check-out queues that get me down. But not this year. 
﻿Christmas is a time for nostalgia, but not all my memories are entirely happy ones. There have been years when, with the overdraft, unpaid bills, and ever-present cows to be milked, I have  regretted, on Christmas Day, not having chosen another profession. But New Year’s Day always seems to give my spirits a lift; things are bound to get better, the days are starting to get longer or perhaps I am just an eternal optimist. And certainly if you are a farmer at the present time, an optimist you have got to be.
﻿We keep on hearing that small family farmers are  threatened with extinction, that somehow  they are being forced out of existence by the supermarkets or politicians or an uncaring urban public. Eminent people extoll their virtues as if they were a rare species without which the countryside would fall apart or, at the very least, be the poorer for their passing. I recently heard it suggested quite seriously that small farmers should receive a higher price for their produce, particularly milk, in order to help them survive. I don’t know who was supposed to pay for this ‘small farmer’ premium; Government  I presume. 
﻿If I were asked to name any one individual who had made the greatest impact on my farming income over the years, I would, without hesitation, reply ‘John James’. John, as I am sure everyone in the South West knows, was one of a small group of farmers who, in 1960, founded Mole Valley Farmers. At a time when Government guaranteed at least an element of profit on what we produced through the Deficiency Payments System, farmers were being taken to the cleaners by the agricultural supply companies. Everything we needed to run our farms, from fertilisers and machinery to the humble wellington boot, was available only from large national companies who were happy to benefit from any apparent agricultural prosperity. We were buying retail but selling wholesale. 
﻿As an ordinary, fairly ignorant farmer, I am getting fed up with people telling me how I should or should not produce food on my farm. I am speaking metaphorically, of course, since decisions of this nature are now made entirely by my son. But when I started farming, I just got on with the job of producing food in whatever way I thought was best. If I had believed in farming organically, then basically the only decision I had to make was whether I could make a living that way. 
﻿The snowdrops and daffodils are already out, it is ridiculously warm and lambing has started; all good signs that spring may be on the way, although it will probably be snowing by the time you read this. We are lambing this year much later than we usually do. With Dorset-cross ewes, we have for many years lambed in November in order to benefit from the good suck-lamb trade at Easter. The flock only comes inside at night while lambing and, on our light land, we have been able to get the lambs fat on grass without supplementary feeding, and away by February or March. ‘Foot and Mouth’ made a mess of that system, as we used to leave the ram lambs entire. That year the lambs had to remain with their mothers until May or June with the inevitable result: a second crop of lambs appeared in early autumn and the system broke down. I don’t think people outside farming fully realise the knock-on effect something like an F&M outbreak can have. Our male beef animals were fattened as young bulls but during that terrible year these were stuck on the farm months longer than usual and, as you would expect, became overweight and dangerously boisterous. All our male calves and lambs are now castrated, an unexpected consequence for them and for us of a piece of infected imported meat. Anyway Bev, my daughter-in-law, who manages the sheep, has decided that as the start of the early suck-lamb trade is not as clearly defined these days, lambing in February will probably do us just as well.
﻿I am going to risk becoming extremely unpopular with my fellow farmers, this week, by saying that the recently announced proposals for reforms to the CAP are the best news we have had for a very long time. I would go further and say I believe that, if these reforms can be achieved more or less as they have been set out, we will look back on 2003 as being as important to us now as the Agricultural Act of 1947 was to farming then. 
﻿Last autumn, when Jenny and I were staying with my brother on Vancouver Island BC, we took the opportunity to visit a neighbouring beef farmer. His farm is what is known in Canada as a ‘Century’ farm - that is to say it has been occupied and farmed by the same family for over one hundred years. With a son working as a farm contractor in Alberta, who was expected to eventually take over, he seemed quite proud of the designation, although, apart from a notice at the farm entrance, this does not appear to confer any benefits from the Canadian government. In fact quite the opposite - the land could not be developed for anything other than farming and , with sea frontage, the land on both sides of him was making a lot of money for housing which follows the coastline of much of the island.
﻿I enjoyed reading the series of articles by David Prowse last week in the WMN, recalling his memories of the Fifties. For me, those  years evoke far more than just a nostalgia for one’s youth, they were the beginning of  an enormous change in a farming way of life.
﻿Last week I attended the AGM of the National Farmers Union. Why bother, you are probably thinking. Isn’t that the farming organisation beloved by the likes of ‘One man and his dog’ Robin Page and ‘I’m paid too much subsidy’ barley-baron Oliver Walston, and the darling of environmentalists, small farmers and disgruntled members of the rural community generally?  Well, yes - that’s the one and I confess I’ve been pretty critical of it myself on numerous occasions. But I reckon I’m entitled to criticise - I’ve been a paid up member of the NFU for over 50 years, which is more than can be said of Messrs Page and Walston.
﻿Lambing is more or less over for this year, with just the usual few stragglers left. It has been a good lambing according to Bev, my daughter-in-law, who manages the sheep flock. We have had more doubles than usual and the majority are strong enough now to be away up on the mowing grass where hopefully they will stay till they are ready for sale, or, if it is a late spring, until those fields are shut up for silage and hay. I don’t know the exact count, but doubtless Bev has the totals in her flock register. I remember when it was considered unlucky to count the lambs until they were tailed, which was done at a month old with a sharp knife and no local anaesthetic. The tails were then counted instead of the lambs, I suppose to avoid ‘counting your chickens..’. Times change, and for the better for the lambs, but they are about to change again. No more on-farm burial or burning. What are we going to do with the few stillborn lambs or the odd weakly one that doesn’t make it past the first few days?
﻿Growing crops or park keeping? Does the nation really know what it wants from farmers in the future? To find out, I went last week to the launch in Tiverton of the Pilot of the new ‘Broad and Shallow’ or ‘Entry Level Agri-Environment’ Scheme, as it is now called. This is to be the first step towards paying farmers for the work they have traditionally done as they go about their everyday job of producing food. If it wasn’t such a sensitive metaphor, I might be tempted to equate it to the necessary work of painting the walls and cleaning the floor of  an industrial factory. The Curry Report, set up to point the way ahead for farming after the ‘foot and mouth’ disaster, put forward the idea, among others, that support for agriculture should progressively switch from production to the environment. This new scheme is the first result of that and is to be tested during the next two years to see how it might work in practice.  
﻿We have finally had our herd TB test. I say finally as, like many other farms in Devon, the test is long overdue. We are on a two-year testing basis, but due to the ‘Foot and Mouth’ outbreak, it has been over four years since our previous test. Although the hassle is not something we look forward to, the possibility of  TB spreading through the cattle over that length of time, is  very worrying. There has been the odd reactor in neighbouring parishes recently, but we are fortunately in a healthy area and have never had a case in all the fifty years we have farmed here. However, there is always a first time.
﻿Last Thursday, waking up earlier than usual at half past five, I came down to make a cup of tea and turn on the radio to listen to Farming Today. I have never been an early riser, unless occasion demands, so it is not a programme which I hear very often. I wasn’t much put out, therefore, to find the programme cancelled at short notice by reports of the opening shots in the Iraq war - cruise missiles launched at Baghdad during the night from British submarines in the Gulf.
﻿With all that is happening in Iraq, it seems almost an affront to write about day to day life on the farm. It is looking as if the war is not going to be the quick campaign we all hoped for. The never ending coverage on TV is starting to get to me; I find myself switching off almost immediately, which sounds heartless when people are dying, but life has to go on.
﻿I was intending to write about something quite different this week, but two items in the papers recently caught my attention and I can’t let them pass without comment.
﻿We had our annual FABBL inspection recently. For the uninitiated, FABBL stands for ‘Farm Assured British Beef and Lamb’ and is one of the many farm assurance schemes which farmers are almost compulsorily obliged to join these days. From April 1st this year, the FABBL standards have been revised, which inevitably means expanded, and since our inspection was to take place on the 7th, I found myself going through all the paper work to see what new rules we had to meet. 
﻿One of our farming neighbours, Jim Stephens, dropped by the other evening with a cutting from a recent edition of The Times newspaper. He was obviously somewhat put out by an article written by the Times Environment Editor, Anthony Browne and headed ‘Your country needs you: don’t buy British’.
﻿Rain at last. All the newspaper talk of another ‘76’ drought being on the way, seems to have done the trick. It’s very strange how often it happens. There only has to be the most dire predictions of some weather catastrophe, and it’s all change immediately. I reckon there was more to ‘rain dancing’ by the North American Indians than met the eye!  We have thankfully had a decent amount and we certainly needed it. This is a very dry farm; we seem to be in the rain equivalent of a frost pocket - it can be raining hard in the village three miles away in catchy weather and we don’t get a drop. We can’t have too much during April and May.
﻿We had a large family reunion here on Sunday. No, not my family - 33 members of the Gillbard family, a well respected local farming family, who were visiting the places where they had lived and farmed during the last 75 years. Alfred Gillbard and his wife, seven sons and two daughters came to farm about five miles from here in 1928. Alfred is long gone, but his son Les, now in his 80s, grandson Brian, and great grandson Paul are still there and still going strong. Hopefully for the future, Paul seems the most optimistic about the current state of the industry. 
﻿I went to Hatherleigh market last Thursday to see how much store cattle were making. We have some steers to sell, and although we sell privately, if possible, we need to know if we are asking a fair price.
﻿Thanks to Sue Connell of the Lustleigh Horticultural Society, Jenny and I had a very enjoyable farm walk at Prince Charles’s Highgrove farm in Gloucester last week. Jenny would have liked to see the garden, but all the available places were taken for what is obviously, from the row of coaches lined up at the visitor centre, a very popular attraction.
﻿As I walked out the other evening to where our nearest-to-calving suckler cows are grazing, I noticed one, which had calved that day, looking keenly through a little-used gate at the bottom of the field. I walked down to see what was bothering it. Two very small fox cubs, venturing out for possibly their first look at the outside world, were trying to pluck up the courage to follow the vixen which I could see scavenging round the hedgerows. The cow and I stood there watching for quite some time, until the cubs gave up and came back past us and down the earth beside the gate where they were born.
﻿Doing our weekly supermarket shop - I am the trolley pusher - I noticed a lot of New Zealand lamb in the meat section. There was some UK lamb on offer, but not much. Seeing how well our lamb is selling at present, I checked the prices and was not surprised the store was offering shoppers the choice. New Zealand lamb-chops were about £6/kilo against ours at £10/kilo. OK, ours must be fresher than something that has travelled halfway round the world, and I don’t know how much New Zealand farmers are being paid, but I’ll bet the family sitting down to dinner doesn’t ask ‘Mum’ where the lamb came from or even notice any great difference in taste. A French family might, but not an English one.
When you read this, Jenny and I will, hopefully, be on a fortnights holiday in Poland. Like everybody who asks us where we are going, you are probably wondering ‘why Poland?’ Weather permitting, Jim will be making silage, so the timing is not ideal. We still manage without using contractors, and as I am sometimes called on as a standby tractor driver, I feel guilty at being away, but at my age my tractor-driving is probably more of a liability. The tour company we are going with cancelled our chosen date in May for lack of interest, but offered us a discount as compensation if we went now.
﻿Kochane przyjaciele (dear friends), we are safely back from our fortnights holiday in Poland. You can see why we needed an interpreter. It is bad enough trying to pronounce the language, let alone understand it. As I mentioned last week, Joe and June, our American neighbour and his wife, who joined us on a package coach tour, were seeing Poland for the first time. Joe’s grandparents had emigrated to America, and Joe had spoken only Polish as a youngster. We were interested to see how quickly he picked it up again. I think he’d conned us - he was  fluent as soon as we crossed the border, although he was quick to point out that he would hesitate to get involved in a philosophical discussion. Watching the faces of the various people we talked to when he switched into Polish to help them with their English was good enough for me.
﻿As I mentioned last week, Joe had arranged for us to have a meeting with an agricultural economist while we were in Warsaw. Fortunately he was a young man who spoke excellent English, which made it easier to ask him questions direct without having to use Joe as an interpreter. He began by giving us a complete rundown on the precise details of  the level of support payments which Polish farmers could expect to receive from next year. He seemed to take it for granted that their referendum, which was due to be held the following weekend, would result in Poland’s joining the EU.
﻿It is over three weeks since we got back from our holiday in Poland and already it seems a long time ago. I am glad we went and I can strongly recommend it to anyone interested in seeing farming from a different perspective before it is too late. 
﻿The streams that form the boundaries of our farm are fast drying up. We have mains water troughs in most fields, but two areas of permanent pasture still depend on streams for cattle to drink. In 1976 they dried up completely, the only time I have known it to happen, and one or two large trees growing on their banks, which had been here five times longer than I have, died as a result. Trees on our highest ground, which overlies rock, had obviously put down deeper root systems and came through that dreadful summer unscathed. This is not a summer anything like that, but grazing is certainly going to get short if the heat wave goes on. And in our case, quite large areas of the best summer grazing will temporarily be closed to our cattle.  It will no doubt be pouring with rain by the time you read this, but it does remind me of the difference mains-water makes to this farm and the stock carrying capacity of many others round here. 
﻿About three weeks ago, I had a phone call asking if I could spare ten minutes to take part in a survey on the recent performance of Defra, or to be more specific, the Rural Payments Agency. Telephone surveys seem to be all the rage these days, and although it is tempting to just put the phone down, I generally ask politely what they are in aid of. They normally turn out to be an underhand way of trying to sell something, but the caller’s accent can sometimes be so unintelligible that I end up putting the phone down anyway. On this occasion the voice was crystal clear, and the thought of giving my opinion of the RPA, especially after the cock-up over our suckler cow premiums last year, was irresistible.
﻿Mud, mud, glorious mud! Not exactly the description the organizers of the Mid Devon Show were using last Saturday. We set off for Tiverton in a steady drizzle. The weather forecast was optimistic for the afternoon, so I didn’t bother to take wellies - one doesn’t take them to agricultural shows anymore. I am not a great show-goer, but the Mid Devon at Tiverton, only revived in recent years, is our own local show and very successful it always is. By the time we arrived, there was the usual queue of cars and we were directed into the overflow car park, which augured well for attendance figures. It was not too bad underfoot and if it had stopped raining at midday, all would have been well.
﻿6th Aug ‘03
﻿13th Aug ‘03
﻿20th Aug ‘03
﻿27 Aug 03
﻿3rd Sept ‘03
﻿10th Sept ‘03
﻿17 Sept ‘03
﻿24 Sept ‘03
﻿1 Oct ‘03
﻿8 Oct ‘03
﻿15 Oct ‘03
If cattle are going to get out, why do they always do it on a Sunday, or worse still on Christmas day? About 40 cows and calves came wandering down our lane last Sunday morning before we were out and about. We farm both sides of a long narrow Devon lane, with a high proportion of our fields opening on to it. It has been an advantage over the years providing us with easy access, but it has the disadvantage that any accidental breakout can result in animals wandering theoretically to anywhere in the county. Luckily our animals are very territorial and generally come back to the farm buildings, as they did that morning. The worst scenario occurs when a car gets the wrong side of them and keeps on going. The first we know about it is a phone call from a neighbour telling us they can see some cattle heading out of the lane at speed and are they ours. This may all sound as if it’s a frequent occurrence, but fortunately it doesn’t happen very often. 
﻿29 Oct ‘03
﻿5 Nov ‘03
﻿12th Nov ‘03
﻿19 Nov ‘03
﻿26 Nov ‘03
﻿3rd Dec ‘03
﻿10th Dec ‘03
﻿17th Dec ‘03
﻿24th Dec ‘03
﻿31st Dec ‘03
﻿7th Jan ‘04
﻿14th Jan ‘04
﻿21st Jan ‘04
﻿28th Jan ‘04
﻿4th Feb ‘04
﻿11th Feb ‘04
﻿18th Feb ‘04
﻿25th Feb ‘04
﻿3rd March ‘04
﻿10th Mar ‘04
﻿17th Mar ‘04
Today happens to be a strange anniversary for our farm. On March 24th 1884, exactly 120 years ago, this farm was transferred by Local Government Board Order from Down St. Mary parish to the parish of Woolfardisworthy. I discovered this interesting little historical detail quite recently in the Kelly’s Directory of 1930, while researching the previous occupants that had farmed here. A friend, with computer access to the old census details, could find no one living here in the late 19th century until I asked him to check the Down St. Mary records. Sure enough, the farm appears there in the 1881 census, with the name of the farmer, Richard Hern, a 33-year-old bachelor, living here with a housekeeper and employing one man and a boy. The Internet is a great invention if you want to find obscure facts about the past without leaving the comfort of your own home.
﻿31st Mar ‘04
﻿7th Apr ‘04
﻿14th Apr ‘04
﻿21st Apr ‘04
﻿28th Apr ‘04
﻿5th May ‘04
﻿12th May ‘04
﻿19th May ‘04
﻿26th May ‘04
﻿2nd Jun ‘04
﻿9th June ‘04
﻿16th Jun ‘04
﻿23rd Jun ‘04
﻿30th Jun ‘04
﻿7th Jul ‘04
﻿14th July ‘04
﻿21st Jul ‘04
﻿28th Jul ‘04
﻿4th Aug ‘04
﻿11th Aug ‘04
Appreciable rain at last and we certainly needed it. Our pastures were beginning to dry up fast and it was looking increasingly likely that the four months grazing, with which we hope to take the cattle and sheep through to the end of November without additional feed, was not going to happen this year. By cutting silage or hay fields only once and letting the aftermaths grow for eight weeks before restocking, we can generally enjoy a fairly stress-free autumn, as well as shortening the inevitable slog of winter chores. On our light land the animals stay out until pretty late in the year, but wet weather on blackberry grass is little use and damages the sward for next spring. This wet spell has come just right and everywhere has greened up nicely. Even the very heavy rain we had last Thursday was welcome, although neighbours with the odd field of corn left to cut might not agree.
﻿25th Aug ‘04
﻿1st Sep ‘04
﻿8th Sep ‘04
﻿15th Sep ‘04
﻿22nd Sep ‘04
﻿27th Sep ‘04
﻿6th Oct ‘04
﻿13th Oct ‘04
﻿27th Oct ‘04
I am only just recovering from a totally surprise ‘bash’, which the family organised last Friday to celebrate our 50 years of trouble and strife - Jenny’s description, not mine. As you would expect, with friends and relatives gathered from all parts, the get-together continued through Saturday, and for once in my life I actually welcomed that gloomy harbinger of winter: the extra hour in bed on Sunday morning.
Hardly a week goes by without an item in the news about the latest figures for wild bird populations. It normally takes the form of a hand-wringing exercise by a national or international bird society, bewailing the decline of one or more species considered vital indicators to the well being of the planet.
If ever we take a holiday in Scotland again, I must be very careful not to light up a cigarette with my coffee after enjoying an Angus steak in a Scottish restaurant. I might very well find the long arm of the law tapping me on the shoulder, with the suggestion that I spend the night in a cell. Not that I’m that bothered about the Scots being permitted to curtail my civil rights as a UK citizen; I haven’t smoked since my student days and if passive smoking is killing off too many north of the border, I suppose Scotland has the right to do something about it. It has its own parliament, after all.
﻿“That was the week that was – its over, let it go”. The words of the song that opened the satirical TV programme in the 1960s sprang to mind as I listened to the extraordinary statement with which the Speaker of the Commons closed the Hunting debate last Thursday evening, before invoking the Parliament Act. The actual wording of the message from the Lords was such gibberish that it was not surprising he followed it by saying that he reads these messages but doesn’t understand them. Some of the speeches in the debates in both Houses, which I also listened to that afternoon, also showed a singular lack of understanding on both sides. Last week may be over, but it certainly doesn’t look like going away.
﻿Unexpectedly and rather late, we’ve drilled our triticale. I mentioned in this column a month ago that the opportunity to plant any winter corn this year seemed to have slipped by, thanks to the very wet state of the ground. Even the hope of getting in one field with the wheat/rye hybrid, to spread the work of tilling and harvesting next year, looked to have gone. But the few dry days last week encouraged Jim to see if our contractors were free to give it a go. And to my surprise, last Friday saw a 16-acre field ploughed and drilled in the day. Alan Isaac reckoned it had gone in better than much of the corn he drilled in October. Modern machinery certainly makes a difference.
Christmas is coming and the goose we’ve ordered is hopefully getting fat. What the pennies and the old man’s hat in the nursery rhyme refer to I’ve no idea. I believe most nursery rhymes originated in some political scandal of the day, but I’ve never heard the origin of this one. I must ask John Burns, who I’m sure will know the answer, when I go and fetch our bird from him.
﻿Like them or loathe them, it is surprising to learn that they actually hate each other. No, not politicians; I’m talking about the supermarkets chains. I always assumed that the big four, as they are known – Tesco, Asda, Morrisons and Sainsbury’s - were ruled by men with hearts of stone and a steely eye for the bottom line, and no emotions worth writing about. But Clive Beddall, speaking at the Devon NFU AGM in Exeter last week, assured us that in reality they felt so strongly about each other that, given half a chance, their greatest delight was in trying to put one another out of business. And Clive is probably the best-qualified man in the UK when it comes to a discussion about supermarkets. He worked for The Grocer magazine for nearly 40 years and was editor-in-chief for ten years until retirement. He now runs his own food and media consultancy and is a regular speaker on food matters throughout Europe.
I scrambled out of the passenger seat and slid a brick under the back wheel of the Riley. It was midday on a Friday in the middle of July 1951. I can remember it as if it were yesterday. It was the first time I set foot on Devon soil – or tarmac to be precise. We were half way up Fore Street on our way into Exeter and John was worried that our dynamo appeared to have packed up. He had spotted a garage on the other side of the road and being reluctant to switch off the engine, left me to ensure the handbrake didn’t fail while he made some enquires about replacement dynamos. 
By Monday, the weekend thunderstorms had passed and John and I set off once more to find a farm in Devon. The oppressive heat of the previous week was gone, and with it the gloom that had overtaken us on our long drive back from Exeter the previous Friday. We really hadn’t expected to find a replacement dynamo, and as we only had that one ten-day opportunity, I think we’d subconsciously given up any hope of our dream farm. But it was another day, and although we might not be able to view as many farms as we’d intended, we weren’t about to give up. 

﻿12th Jan ’05
﻿19th Jan ’05
﻿26th Jan ’05
﻿2nd Feb ’05
﻿16th Feb ’05

﻿2nd Mar ’05
﻿9th Mar ’05
﻿16th Mar ’05
﻿23rd Mar ’05
﻿30th Mar ’05
﻿6th Apr ’05
﻿13th Apr ’05
﻿20th Apr ’05
﻿27th Apr ’05
﻿4th May ’05 
18th May ’05
﻿1st June ’05
﻿8th June ’05
﻿15 June ’05
﻿22nd Jun ’05
﻿29 June ’05
﻿6th July ’05
﻿13th July ’05
﻿20th July ’05
﻿27th July ’05
﻿3rd August ’05
﻿10th Aug ’05
﻿17th Aug ’05
﻿24th Aug ’05
﻿31st Aug ’05
﻿7th Sept ’05
﻿14th Sept ’05
﻿21st Sept ’05
﻿28th Sept ’05
﻿5th Oct ’05
﻿26th Oct ’05
﻿2nd Nov ’05
﻿9th Nov ’05
﻿16th Nov ’05
﻿23rd Nov ’05
﻿30th Nov ’05
﻿7th Dec ’05
﻿14th Dec ’05
﻿21st Dec ’05
﻿11th Jan 2006
﻿18th Jan ’06
﻿25th Jan ’06
﻿1 Feb ’06
﻿8th Feb ’06
﻿15th Feb ’06
﻿22nd Feb ’06
﻿1st March ’06
﻿8th March ’06
﻿15th March ’06
﻿22nd Mar ’06
﻿29th Mar ’06
﻿5th Apr ’06
﻿12th Apr ’06
﻿26th April ’06
﻿3rd May ’06
﻿10th May ’06
﻿24th May ’06
﻿31st May ’06
﻿7th June ’06
﻿14th June ’06
﻿21st June ’06
﻿28th Jun ’06
﻿5th July ’06
﻿12th July ’06
﻿19th July ’06
﻿2nd August ’06
﻿9th August ’06
﻿16th August 06
﻿23rd Aug 06
﻿30th Aug ’06
﻿6th Sept  ’06
﻿13th Sept ‘06
﻿20th Sept ‘06
﻿27th Sept ’06 
﻿4th Oct ’06
﻿11th Oct ’06
﻿18th Oct ’06
﻿25th Oct ’06
﻿1st Nov ’06
﻿8th Nov ’06
﻿15th Nov ’06
﻿22nd Nov ’06
﻿29th Nov ’06
﻿6th Dec ’06
﻿13th Dec ’06
﻿20th Dec ’06
﻿3rd Jan ’07
﻿10th Jan ’07
﻿17th Jan ’07
﻿24th Jan ’07
﻿31st Jan ’07
﻿31st Jan ’07
﻿31st Jan ’07
﻿7th Feb ’07
﻿14th Feb ’07
﻿21st Feb ’07
﻿28th Feb ’07
﻿7th Mar ’07
﻿14th Mar ’07
﻿21st Mar ’07
﻿28th Mar ‘07
﻿4th April ’07
﻿11th April ’07
﻿18th April ’07
﻿25th Apr ’07
﻿2nd May ’07
﻿9th May ’07
﻿23rd May ’07
﻿30th May ’07
﻿6th June ’07
﻿13th June ’07

﻿27th June ’07
﻿4th July ’07
﻿11th July ’07
﻿18th July ’07
﻿25th July ’07
﻿1st August ’07
﻿8th August ’07
﻿15th Aug ’07
We have a rather imposing old farm building that has always puzzled me. Horse-engine houses or roundhouses, as they are commonly called, can be still found on many Westcountry farms. They were built against the old threshing barns, often unobtrusively at the back, to provide the motive power for the threshing machines, which replaced hand flail threshing from early in the 19th century. Redundant for the past hundred years, many sadly are mouldering away, too small or misshapen for much use except as a store or tool shed.
It seems highly likely there will soon be a new day in the farming calendar, conceivably called ‘slurry Sunday’. That is the opinion of a friend of mine, a retired dairy farmer, with considerable experience of the problems associated with that bugbear of modern milk production – the storage and disposal of slurry. We were discussing the latest proposals to come out of Defra, which will impose even more draconian controls on how, when and where we can utilise farm yard manure, something that like money, has to be spread around to be of any value. It looks like a panic response to threats from Brussels, to impose fines on England for failing to lower sufficiently the nitrate levels in our streams and rivers.
﻿5th Sept ’07
﻿12th Sept ’07
﻿19th Sept ’07
﻿26th Sept ’07
﻿3rd Oct ’07
﻿24th Oct ’07
﻿31st Oct ’07
﻿7th Nov ’07
﻿14th Nov ’07
﻿21st Nov ’07
﻿28th Nov ’07
﻿28th Nov ’07
﻿5th Dec ’07
﻿12th Dec ’07
﻿19th Dec ’07
﻿2nd Jan 08
﻿9th Jan ’08
﻿16th Jan ’08
﻿23rd Jan ’08
﻿30th Jan ’08
﻿6th Feb ’08
﻿13th Feb ’08
﻿20th Feb ’08
﻿27th Feb ’08
﻿5th Mar ’08
﻿12th Mar ’08
﻿19th March ’08
﻿26th March ’08
﻿2nd April ’08
﻿9th April ’08
﻿16th Apr ’08
﻿23rd April ’08
﻿30th April ’08
﻿7th May ’08
﻿21st May ‘08
﻿28th May ’08
﻿11th June ’08
﻿18th June ’08
﻿25th June ’08
﻿2nd July ’08
﻿9th July ’08
﻿16th July ’08
﻿23rd July ’08
﻿30th July ’08
﻿6th Aug ’08
﻿13th August ’08
﻿20 August ’08
﻿27th Aug ’08
﻿3rd Sept ’08
We are hearing more and more about the need for farmers to measure our carbon footprint, reduce our greenhouse gases, and generate our own energy from anaerobic digesters. So much so that, any day now, I am expecting a thick must-read booklet from Defra to drop onto the doormat. But if I follow every instruction to the letter, will it make a blind bit of difference to the future of the planet? Of course not – frankly, it is all a load of horse feathers.
﻿24th Sept ’08
﻿1st Oct ’08
﻿8th Oct ’08
﻿22nd Oct ’08
﻿29th Oct ’08
﻿5th Nov ’08
﻿12th Nov ’08
﻿19th Nov ’08
﻿26th Nov ’08
﻿3rd Dec ’08
﻿10th Dec ’08
﻿17th Dec ’08
﻿31st Dec ’08
﻿7th Jan ’09
﻿14th Jan ’09
﻿21st Jan ’09
﻿28th Jan ’09
﻿4th Feb ’09
﻿11th Feb 20’09
﻿18th Feb ’09
﻿25th Feb ’09
I occasionally daydream about returning to a golden age of farming. I like to think that it might once again be possible to get up in the morning, go out and work on the farm and come in at night without ever, from one year’s end to the next, having to lay a hand on pen, paper or ministry booklet. 
﻿11th Mar ’09
﻿18th March ’09
﻿25 March ’09
﻿1st April ’09
﻿8th April ’09
﻿15th Apr ’09
﻿22nd April ’09
﻿6th  May ’09
﻿
﻿
﻿27th May '09
﻿3rd June '09
﻿10 June '09
﻿17th June '09
﻿24th June '09
﻿1st July '09
﻿8th July '09
﻿15thJuly '09
﻿22nd July '09
﻿29th July '09
﻿19th Aug '09
﻿26th Aug '09
Prominent Westcountry farming figure Ian Pettyfer is the latest member of the WMN farming team. Mr Pettyfer, who is in his early 70s, helps run a mixed, 300-acre family farm at South Emlett, Morchard Bishop, north of Crediton. After leaving school in 1947 he worked on a farm in surrey before going to Cambridge to read Agriculture in 1948. Arriving in Devon in 1951, he bought South Emlett in partnership with John Thurley, a fellow graduate. He bought out John's share in 1954, and married Jenny a neighbouring farmer's daughter. They have three children - Cath, Jim and Mel. Mr Pettyfer milked Guernsey cows until the mid-1980s, and became closely involved with Quality Milk Producers Ltd, the Jersey and Guernsey farmers' co-operative responsible for marketing and promoting CI and Gold Top milk nationally. He believes his past tenure as NFU Devon chairman was intended by his fellow farmers as "a penance for not keeping my mouth shut". He added: "We now farm with a herd of suckler cows and a  flock of early lambing sheep. Jim and Bev run the farm, and Jenny and I, although we still live on the farm, take a back seat. This involves doing some of the more tedious, but financially necessary, form filling, and checking the cattle. It also gives me time to take more interest in the farm's wildlife."
Ian Pettyfer Farmed South Emlett Farm in Mid Devon from 19-- to 20--.
      3 - IGD - Institute of Grocery Distribution
      1 - BCMS - British Cattle Movement Service
﻿Ian Pettyfer - brief background
Farmer - family farm - South Emlett, Morchard Bishop - 300 acres - mixed farm with woodland.
